IBX-3766 [CLOUD] Fastly Image Optimizer Integration (#1864)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/content_management/images/fastly_io.md

---
description: Configure Fastly Image Optimiser.
---

# Fastly Image Optimiser (Fastly IO)

The Fastly Image Optimizer (Fastly IO) is an external service that provides real-time image optimisation for multiple input and output formats.
It serves and caches image requests from your origin server, making your website faster and more efficient.

To be able to configure this feature you need:

> - [Platform.sh project](https://docs.platform.sh/guides/ibexa/deploy.html)

Reviewer: It can be any hosting, even an old computer in the basement - right now it sounds to me as if it's a Platform.sh-only feature

- [Fastly IO subscription](https://docs.fastly.com/en/guides/about-fastly-image-optimizer)

## Enable shielding

To use Fastly Image Optimizer, you need shielding, for more details
see [Enabling and disabling shielding](https://developer.fastly.com/learning/concepts/shielding/).

To enable shielding, add [`snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl`](https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl) snippet to your config.

Next, use command below in Fastly CLI: 
 
```bash
- fastly vcl snippet create --name="Re-Enable shielding on restart" --version=active --autoclone --priority 100 --type recv --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl
- fastly service-version activate --version=latest
```

## VCL configuration

> To manipulate your Fastly VCL configuration directly from the command line,

Reviewer: I think this paragraph should somehow mention the new image optimizer vcl:
https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/ibexa_image_optimizer.vcl

    }
}
```

You can define what image formats will be included, for example: `gif|png|jpe?g|webp`
and which paths should be used as a source of images, for example: `^/var/([a-zA-Z0-9_-]+)/storage/images`. For more configuration options, see [Enabling image optimization](https://developer.fastly.com/reference/io/#enabling-image-optimization).

After you save this snippet or create your own, you can upload it from the command line using:

```bash
fastly vcl snippet create --name="Shielding" --version=active --autoclone --type recv --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl
```

## Define SiteAccess for Fastly IO

Fastly IO configuration is SiteAccess aware.
You can define what handler should be used for a specific SiteAccess under `variation_handler_identifier`.
You need to set it up as `fastly`, so Fastly IO can generate all image links.
By default, it is set as `alias`, and it points to a build in image optimiser.

```yaml
ibexa:
    fastly:
        variation_handler_identifier: 'fastly'
```

## Image configuration

When you define image variation keys for Fastly IO keep in mind
that they should reflect variations in your original setup.

> The built-in image optimiser serves as backup to Fastly IO,

Reviewer 2: It does serve as backup, but it it will only serve image in case of misconfiguration. It won't serve backup image in case of ie. Fastly IO failure.

---
description: Configure Fastly Image Optimizer.
---

# Fastly Image Optimizer (Fastly IO)

The Fastly Image Optimizer (Fastly IO) is an external service that provides real-time image optimisation for multiple input and output formats.
It serves and caches image requests from your origin server, making your website faster and more efficient.

To be able to configure this feature, you need [Fastly IO subscription](https://docs.fastly.com/en/guides/about-fastly-image-optimizer).

## Enable shielding

> To use Fastly Image Optimizer, you need shielding,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use Fastly Image Optimizer, you need shielding.
```

> to enable it follow steps in Fastly documentation, [Enabling and disabling shielding](https://developer.fastly.com/learning/concepts/shielding/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable it, follow steps in Fastly documentation, [Enabling and disabling shielding](https://developer.fastly.com/learning/concepts/shielding/).
```

> Before proceeding, make sure that you have the [`snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl`](https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl) added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, make sure that you have the [`snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl`](https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl) configuration file added to your project.
```

You can add it using Fastly CLI: 
 
```bash
- fastly vcl snippet create --name="Re-Enable shielding on restart" --version=active --autoclone --priority 100 --type recv --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl
- fastly service-version activate --version=latest
```

Next, you need to choose the [Shield location](https://developer.fastly.com/learning/concepts/shielding/#choosing-a-shield-location) from the Shielding menu in Fastly web interface as specified in [Fastly IO documentation](https://docs.fastly.com/en/guides/shielding#enabling-shielding).

## VCL configuration

To manipulate your Fastly VCL configuration directly from the command line,

> you need to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you need to:

```

- [install Fastly CLI](https://developer.fastly.com/learning/tools/cli#installing),
- define `FASTLY_SERVICE_ID` and `FASTLY_KEY` environmental variables,

> - set restrictions on optimiser by using [ibexa_image_optimizer.vcl](https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/ibexa_image_optimizer.vcl). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- set restrictions on the optimiser by using [`ibexa_image_optimizer.vcl`](https://github.com/ibexa/fastly/blob/main/fastly/ibexa_image_optimizer.vcl). 
```

> This is an example VCL snippet uploaded by using `vcl_recv` hook:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example VCL snippet uploaded by using the `vcl_recv` hook:
```

```bash
fastly vcl custom create --name="Ibexa VCL" --main --version=latest --autoclone  --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/ez_main.vcl
fastly vcl snippet create --name="Shielding" --version=active --autoclone --type recv --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl
```

Fastly passes requests through the image optimizer by adding the `x-fastly-imageopto-api` header in `vcl_recv`.

> You need to restrict optimizer by file path and extension to only apply to image requests:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to restrict the optimizer by file path and extension to only apply to image requests:
```

        set req.http.x-fastly-imageopto-api = "fastly";
    }
}
```

You can define what image formats will be included, for example: `gif|png|jpe?g|webp`
and which paths should be used as a source of images, for example: `^/var/([a-zA-Z0-9_-]+)/storage/images`.
For more configuration options, see [Enabling image optimization](https://developer.fastly.com/reference/io/#enabling-image-optimization).

After you save this snippet or create your own, you can upload it from the command line using:

```bash
fastly vcl snippet create --name="Shielding" --version=active --autoclone --type recv --content=vendor/ibexa/fastly/fastly/snippet_re_enable_shielding.vcl
```

## Define SiteAccess for Fastly IO

Fastly IO configuration is SiteAccess aware.
You can define what handler should be used for a specific SiteAccess under `variation_handler_identifier`.
You need to set it up as `fastly`, so Fastly IO can generate all image links.
By default, it is set as `alias`, and it points to a built-in image optimizer.
You can also set up a custom handler if your setup requires it.

```yaml
ibexa:
    system:
        my_siteaccess:
            variation_handler_identifier: 'fastly'
```

> You can also use environmental variables to configure specific handler for a SiteAccess.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also use environmental variables to configure a specific handler for a SiteAccess.
```

See the example below to configure it with the `.env` file:

```
IBEXA_VARIATION_HANDLER_IDENTIFIER="fastly"
```

## Image configuration

> When you define image variation keys for Fastly IO keep in mind

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you define image variation keys for Fastly IO, keep in mind
```

that they should reflect variations in your original setup.
The built-in image optimizer serves as backup to Fastly IO in case of misconfiguration,

> because of that it needs to be able to serve the same image variations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
so it needs to be able to serve the same image variations.
```

Fastly IO image filters are not compatible with our built-in filters,

> because of that you will not be able to reflect your original filters accurately with Fastly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
so you will not be able to reflect your original filters accurately with Fastly.
```
